1
WHY YOU SHOULD VISIT CEMETERIES
Survivorship Bias
No matter where Rick looks, he sees rock stars. They appear on television, on the front pages of magazines, in concert programmes and at online fan sites. Their songs are unavoidable - in the mall, on his playlist, in the gym. The rock stars are everywhere. There are lots of them. And they are successful. Motivated by the stories of countless guitar heroes, Rick starts a band. Will he make it big? The probability lies a fraction above zero. Like so many others, he will most likely end up in the graveyard of failed musicians. This burial ground houses 10,000 times more musicians than the stage does, but no journalist is interested in failures - with the exception of fallen superstars. This makes the cemetery invisible to outsiders.
In daily life, because triumph is made more visible than failure, you systematically overestimate your chances of succeeding. As an outsider, you (like Rick) succumb to an illusion, and you mistake how minuscule the probability of success really is. Rick, like so many others, is a victim of Survivorship Bias.
Behind every popular author you can find 100 other writers whose books will never sell. Behind them are another 100 who haven't found publishers. Behind them are yet another 100 whose unfinished manuscripts gather dust in drawers.
And behind each one of these are 100 people who dream of - one day - writing a book. You, however, hear of only the successful authors (these days, many of them self-published) and fail to recognise how unlikely literary success is. The same goes for photographers, entrepreneurs, artists, athletes, architects, Nobel Prize winners, television presenters and beauty queens. The media is not interested in digging around in the graveyards of the unsuccessful. Nor is this its job. To elude the survivorship bias, you must do the digging yourself.
You will also come across survivorship bias when dealing with money and risk: imagine that a friend founds a start-up. You belong to the circle of potential investors and you sense a real opportunity: this could be the next Google. Maybe you'll be lucky. But what is the reality? The most likely scenario is that the company will not even make it off the starting line. The second most likel

outcome is that it will go bankrupt within three years. Of the companies that survive these first three years, most never grow to more than ten employees. So, should you never put your hard-earned money at risk? Not necessarily. But you should recognise that the survivorship bias is at work, distorting the probability of success like cut glass.
Take the Dow Jones Industrial Average Index. It consists of out-and-out survivors. Failed and small businesses do not enter the stock market, and yet these represent the majority of business ventures. A stock index is not indicative of a country's economy. Similarly, the press does not report proportionately on all musicians. The vast number of books and coaches dealing with success should also make you sceptical: the unsuccessful don't write books or give lectures on their failures.
Survivorship bias can become especially pernicious when you become a member of the 'winning' team. Even if your success stems from pure coincidence, you'll discover similarities with other winners and be tempted to mark these as
'success factors'. However, if you ever visit the graveyard of failed individuals and companies, you will realise that its tenants possessed many of the same traits that characterise your success.
If enough scientists examine a particular phenomenon, a few of these studies will deliver statistically significant results through pure coincidence - for example the relationship between red wine consumption and high life expectancy. Such (false) studies immediately attain a high degree of popularity and attention. As result, you will not read about the studies with the 'boring', but correct results.
Survivorship bias means this: people systematically overestimate their chances of success. Guard against it by frequently visiting the graves of once-promising projects, investments and careers. It is a sad walk, but one that should clear your mind.
See also Self-serving Bias (ch. 45); Beginner's Luck (ch. 49); Base-Rate Neglect (ch. 28);
Induction (ch. 31); Neglect of Probability (ch. 26); Illusion of Skill (ch. 94); Intention-To-Treat Error (ch. 98)

2
DOES HARVARD MAKE YOU SMARTER?
Swimmer's Body Illusion
As essayist and trader Nassim Taleb resolved to do something about the stubborn extra pounds he'd be carrying, he contemplated taking up various sports. However, joggers seemed scrawny and unhappy, and bodybuilders looked broad and stupid, and tennis players? Oh, so upper-middle class!
Swimmers, though, appealed to him with their well-built, streamlined bodies. He decided to sign up at his local swimming pool and to train hard twice a week.
A short while later, he realised that he had succumbed to an illusion.
Professional swimmers don't have perfect bodies because they train extensively.
Rather, they are good swimmers because of their physiques. How their bodies are designed is a factor for selection and not the result of their activities. Similarly, female models advertise cosmetics and thus, many female consumers believe that these products make you beautiful. But it is not the cosmetics that make these women model-like. Quite simply, the models are born attractive and only for this reason are they candidates for cosmetics advertising. As with the swimmers' bodies, beauty is a factor for selection and not the result.
Whenever we confuse selection factors with results, we fall prey to what Taleb calls the swimmer's body illusion. Without this illusion, half of advertising campaigns would not work. But this bias has to do with more than just the pursuit of chiselled cheekbones and chests. For example, Harvard has the reputation of being a top university. Many highly successful people have studied there. Does this mean that Harvard is a good school? We don't know. Perhaps the school is terrible, and it simply recruits the brightest students around. I experienced this phenomenon at the University of St Gallen in Switzerland. It is said to be one of the top ten business schools in Europe, but the lessons I received (although note that this was twenty-five years ago were mediocre. Nevertheless, many of its graduates were successful. The reason behind this is unknown - perhaps it was due to the climate in the narrow valley or even the cafeteria food. Most probable, however, is the rigorous selection.
All over the world, MBA schools lure candidates with statistics regarding future

income. This simple calculation is supposed to show that the horrendously high tuition fees pay for themselves after a short period of time. Many prospective students fall for this approach. I am not implying that the schools doctor the statistics, but still their statements must not be swallowed wholesale. Why?
Because those who pursue an MBA are different from those who do not. The income gap between these groups stems from a multitude of reasons that have nothing to do with the MBA degree itself. Once again we see the swimmer's body illusion at work: the factor for selection confused with the result. So, if you are considering further study, do it for reasons other than a bigger pay cheque.
When I ask happy people about the secret of their contentment, I often hear answers like "You have to see the glass half-full rather than half-empty.' It is as if these individuals do not realise that they were born happy, and now tend to see the positive in everything. They do not realise that cheerfulness - according to many studies, such as those conducted by Harvard's Dan Gilbert - is largely a personality trait that remains constant throughout life. Or, as social scientists Lykken and Tellegen starkly suggest, 'trying to be happier is as futile as trying to be taller. Thus, the swimmer's body illusion is also a self-illusion. When these optimists write self-help books, the illusion can become treacherous. That's why it's important to give a wide berth to tips and advice from self-help authors. For billions of people, these pieces of advice are unlikely to help. But because the unhappy don't write self-help books about their failures, this fact remains hidden.
In conclusion: be wary when you are encouraged to strive for certain things - be it abs of steel, immaculate looks, a higher income, a long life, a particular demeanour or happiness. You might fall prey to the swimmer's body illusion.
Before you decide to take the plunge, look in the mirror - and be honest about what you see.
See also Halo Effect (ch. 38); Outcome Bias (ch. 20); Self-Selection Bias (ch. 47);
Alternative Blindness (ch. 71); Fundamental Attribution Error (ch. 36)