1
WHY YOU SHOULD VISIT CEMETERIES
Survivorship Bias
No matter where Rick looks, he sees rock stars. They appear on television, on the front pages of magazines, in concert programmes and at online fan sites. Their songs are unavoidable - in the mall, on his playlist, in the gym. The rock stars are everywhere. There are lots of them. And they are successful. Motivated by the stories of countless guitar heroes, Rick starts a band. Will he make it big? The probability lies a fraction above zero. Like so many others, he will.

outcome is that it will go bankrupt within three years. Of the companies that survive these first three years, most never grow to more than ten employees. So, should you never put your hard-earned money at risk? Not necessarily. But you should recognise that the survivorship bias is at work, distorting the probability of success like cut glass.

Survivorship bias can become especially pernicious when you become a member of the 'winning' team. Even if your success stems from pure coincidence, you'll discover similarities with other winners and be tempted to mark these as
'success factors'. However, if you ever visit the graveyard of failed individuals and companies, you will realise that its tenants possessed many of the same traits that characterise your success.
If enough scientists examine a particular phenomenon, a few of these studies will deliver statistically significant results through pure coincidence - for example the relationship between red wine consumption and high life expectancy. Such (false) studies immediately attain a high degree of popularity and attention. As result, you will not read about the studies with the 'boring', but correct results.
Survivorship bias means this: people systematically overestimate their chances of success. Guard against it by frequently visiting the graves of once-promising projects, investments and careers. It is a sad walk, but one that should clear your mind.
See also Self-serving Bias (ch. 45); Beginner's Luck (ch. 49); Base-Rate Neglect (ch. 28);
Induction (ch. 31); Neglect of Probability (ch. 26); Illusion of Skill (ch. 94); Intention-To-Treat Error (ch. 98)

2
DOES HARVARD MAKE YOU SMARTER?
Swimmer's Body Illusion
A short while later, he realised that he had succumbed to an illusion.
Professional swimmers don't have perfect bodies because they train extensively.
Rather, they are good swimmers because of their physiques. How their bodies are designed is a factor for selection and not the result of their activities. Similarly, female models advertise cosmetics and thus, many female consumers believe that these products make you beautiful. But it is not the cosmetics that make these women model-like. Quite simply, the models are born attractive and only for this reason are they candidates for cosmetics advertising. As with the swimmers' bodies, beauty is a factor for selection and not the result.

income. This simple calculation is supposed to show that the horrendously high tuition fees pay for themselves after a short period of time. Many prospective students fall for this approach. I am not implying that the schools doctor the statistics, but still their statements must not be swallowed wholesale. Why?
Because those who pursue an MBA are different from those who do not. The income gap between these groups stems from a multitude of reasons that have nothing to do with the MBA degree itself. Once again we see the swimmer's body illusion at work: the factor for selection confused with the result. So, if you are considering further study, do it for reasons other than a bigger pay cheque.

In conclusion: be wary when you are encouraged to strive for certain things - be it abs of steel, immaculate looks, a higher income, a long life, a particular demeanour or happiness. You might fall prey to the swimmer's body illusion.
Before you decide to take the plunge, look in the mirror - and be honest about what you see.
See also Halo Effect (ch. 38); Outcome Bias (ch. 20); Self-Selection Bias (ch. 47);
Alternative Blindness (ch. 71); Fundamental Attribution Error (ch. 36)
